tvayi viharaṇalole bālajālai: pralamba-
pramathanasavilambe dhenava: svairacārā: |
tṛṇakutukaniviṣṭā dūradūraṃ carantya:
kimapi vipinamaiṣīkākhyamīṣāṃbabhūvu: ||1||
tvayi viharaṇa-lole	(when) Thou (were) engaged in playing
bāla-jālai:	with the boys' group
pralamba-pramathana-	in the Pralambaasura killing
savilambe	(and) were delayed
dhenava: svaira-cārā:	the cows of their own will
tṛṇa-kutuka-niviṣṭā	eager to eat grass
dūra-dūraṃ carantya:	far and far moving
kimapi vipinam-	(to) some forest
aiṣīka-ākhyam-	Aishika (also a grass) named
īṣāṃ babhūvu:	came near
As Thou were engaged in playing with the group of boys and were held up in the destruction of Pralambaasura, the cows moved far ahead in their eagerness to eat grass. They reached a nearby forest named Aishika.
anadhigatanidāghakrauryavṛndāvanāntāt
bahiridamupayātā: kānanaṃ dhenavastā: |
tava virahaviṣaṇṇā ūṣmalagrīṣmatāpa-
prasaravisaradambhasyākulā: stambhamāpu: ||2||
anadhigata	(which was) not felt
nidāgha-krauryaṃ-	the summer heat cruel (intensity)
vṛndāvana-antāt	at Vrindaavana's outer end
bahi:-idam-upayātā:	outside this (who had) reached
kānanaṃ dhenava:-tā:	the forest, those cows
tava viraha-viṣaṇṇā	(by) Thy separation tormented
ūṣmala-grīṣma-tāpa-	(and) the intensely hot the summer heat
prasara-visarat-	increasing and spreading
ambhasya-ākulā:	for want of water suffering
stambham-āpu:	motionless became
The cruel summer heat was not felt in the Vrindaavana forest. But when the cows reached the outskirts of the forest, they were tormented by the intensely hot summer heat which was increasing and spreading. Exhausted by the heat and for the want of water and also out of grief at the separation from Thee, they stood stunned and motionless.
tadanu saha sahāyairdūramanviṣya śaure
galitasaraṇimuñjāraṇyasañjātakhedam |
paśukulamabhivīkṣya kṣipramānetumārā-
ttvayi gatavati hī hī sarvato'gnirjajṛmbhe ||3||
tadanu saha sahāyai:-	then with Thy helpers
dūram-anviṣya	till far searching
śaure	O Krishna
galita-saraṇi-	loosing the way
muñja-araṇya-	(reaching) the Munja forest
sañāta-khedam	overcome by exhaustion
paśukulam-abhivīkṣya	the cattle seeing
kṣipram-ānetum-	quickly to bring
ārāt-tvayi gatavati	near (when) Thou went
hī hī sarvata:-	alas, alas, all around
agni;-jajṛmbhe	a fire broke out
O Krishna! Along with Thy mates, Thou ventured far in search of the cattle and having lost the way, Thou reached the Munja forest. There Thou discovered the cows standing in distress and as Thou were nearing them to bring them back, alas a wild fire broke out and spread.
sakalahariti dīpte ghorabhāṅkārabhīme
śikhini vihatamārgā ardhadagdhā ivārtā: |
ahaha bhuvanabandho pāhi pāhīti sarve
śaraṇamupagatāstvāṃ tāpahartāramekam ||4||
sakala-hariti dīpte	(when) all the directions were blazing
ghora-bhāṅkāra-bhīme	(with) terrific roars frightening
śikhini	the fire
vihata-mārgā	obstructed the ways
ardha-dagdhā:	half burnt
iva-ārtā:	like tormented
ahaha bhuvanabandho	O Friend of all!
pāhi pāhi-iti	save, save us, thus
sarve śaraṇam-upagatā:-	all of them took refuge
tvāṃ tāpa-hartāram-ekam	in Thee, from all sorrows the saviour, the Only One
All the directions were blazing with the outrageous fire and its terrific frightening roars. All the escape routes were obstructed and all the boys and cows were so tormented as if they were half burnt. They all took refuge in Thee who are a friend of all and called Thee saying, ' O The Only One saviour from all sorrows , save us, save us.'
alamalamatibhītyā sarvato mīlayadhvaṃ
dṛśamiti tava vācā mīlitākṣeṣu teṣu |
kva nu davadahano'sau kutra muñjāṭavī sā
sapadi vavṛtire te hanta bhāṇḍīradeśe ||5||
alam-alam-	enough enough
ati-bhītyā	of so much fright
sarvata: mīlayadhvaṃ	all of you close
dṛśam-iti	the eyes, thus
tava vācā	by Thy words
mīlita-akṣeṣu	(when they) had closed the eyes
teṣu kva nu	when they, where indeed (was)
dava-dahana:-asau	forest fire that
kutra muñjā-aṭavī sā	where (was) Munja forest that
sapadi vavṛtire te	at once found themselves they
hanta bhāṇḍīra-deśe	how wonderful, in Bhaandeera land
Enough, enough of so much fright. Let all completely close their eyes.' Thus on Thy instruction when they had all closed their eyes, where indeed was the forest fire and where was the Munja forest? They instantly found themselves in the Bhaandeera area inside Vrindaavana. How wonderful!
jaya jaya tava māyā keyamīśeti teṣāṃ
nutibhiruditahāso baddhanānāvilāsa: |
punarapi vipinānte prācara: pāṭalādi-
prasavanikaramātragrāhyagharmānubhāve ||6||
jaya jaya	hail hail
tava māyā	Thy mysterious ways
kā-iyam	what is it
īśa-	O Lord
iti teṣāṃ	thus by them (the cowherds)
nutibhi:-uditahāsa:	being praised, smilingly
baddha-nānā-vilāsa:	in various ways sporting
puna:-api	again also
vipina-ante	in the forest's end
prācara: pāṭalādi-	Thou roamed about, (where) the Paatala etc
prasava-nikara-	(flowers) blooming in bunches
mātra-grāhya-	(were the) only indication
gharma-anubhāve	summer season's presence
Hail, hail, Thy mysterious ways, unfathomable, O Lord!' Thus Thou were smilingly praised by them. Thou continued to roam about and sport in various ways, where the Paatala flowers blooming in bunches, were the only indication of the presence of the summer season.
tvayi vimukhamivoccaistāpabhāraṃ vahantaṃ
tava bhajanavadanta: paṅkamucchoṣayantam |
tava bhujavadudañcadbhūriteja:pravāhaṃ
tapasamayamanaiṣīryāmuneṣu sthaleṣu ||7||
tvayi vimukham-	(when) unto Thee, (one is) indifferent
iva-uccai:-	like that, very intense
tāpabhāraṃ vahantam	the weight of heat, carrying
tava bhajana-vadanta:	Thy praises speaking (worshipping)
paṅkam-	the mud/slush
ucchoṣayantam	drying up
tava bhuja-vat-	Thy two arms like
udañcat-	emitting
bhūri-teja-pravāhaṃ	a great brilliance flow
tapa-samayam-	the summer time
anaiṣī:	Thou spend
yāmuneṣu sthaleṣu	on the Yamunaa banks
The intense heat of the summer time was like the weight of the heat of passion that people carry in their minds who are indifferent to Thee. It was like the heat which is created by worshipping Thee, which dries up all the mud and slush of Thy devotees. It was like the brilliance flowing from Thy two arms. Such a summer time Thou spent on the banks of the river Yamunaa.
tadanu jaladajālaistvadvapustulyabhābhi-
rvikasadamalavidyutpītavāsovilāsai: |
sakalabhuvanabhājāṃ harṣadāṃ varṣavelāṃ
kṣitidharakuhareṣu svairavāsī vyanaiṣī: ||8||
tadanu jalada-jālai:-	then with the cloud clusters
tvat-vapu:-	Thy body
tulya-bhābhi:-	like splendorous
vikasat-amala-	shining pure
vidyut-pītavāsa:-	lightening (like Thy) yellow garment
vilāsai:	beautifully
sakala-bhuvana-bhājāṃ	(to) all the world's inhabitants
harṣadāṃ varṣavelāṃ	joy giving, the rainy season
kṣitidhara-kuhareṣu	(in) the mountain caves
svairavāsī vyanaiṣī:	at will residing Thou spend
Then, the clusters of clouds in the rainy season were like the hue of Thy splendorous body, the lightening shining was like the luster of Thy beautiful yellow garment. It gave joy to all the inhabitants of the world. Such a rainy season Thou spent, sporting at will, in the caves of the mountain (Govardhana).
kuharatalaniviṣṭaṃ tvāṃ gariṣṭhaṃ girīndra:
śikhikulanavakekākākubhi: stotrakārī |
sphuṭakuṭajakadambastomapuṣpāñjaliṃ ca
pravidadhadanubheje deva govardhano'sau ||9||
kuharatala-niviṣṭaṃ	in the caves residing
tvāṃ gariṣṭhaṃ	to Thee, the highly honoured
girīndra:	the mountain
śikhi-kula-	the peacocks'
nava-kekā-	pleasant cooings
kākubhi: stotrakārī	as hymns praising
sphuṭa-kuṭaja-kadamba-	blooming Kutaja and Kadamba
stoma-puṣpāñjaliṃ ca	heaps and as flower offerings
pravidadhat-anubheje	performing worship
deva	O Lord! (To Thee)
govardhana:-asau	Govardhana this, (the mountain)
O Lord! To Thee, the highly honoured One, living in its caves, the mountain king (Govardhana) extended its hospitality. It sang hymns of Thy praise in the form of the pleasant cooings of the peacocks. It worshipped Thee in the form of offering heaps of fully bloomed Kutaja and Kadamba flowers falling from the branches at Thy feet.
atha śaradamupetāṃ tāṃ bhavadbhaktaceto-
vimalasalilapūrāṃ mānayan kānaneṣu |
tṛṇamamalavanānte cāru sañcārayan gā:
pavanapurapate tvaṃ dehi me dehasaukhyam ||10||
atha śaradam-upetāṃ	then spring season approaching
tāṃ bhavat-bhakta-ceta:-	that (season) (like) Thy devotees' mind
vimala-salila-pūrāṃ	with pure water full
mānayan kānaneṣu	enjoying in the forests
tṛṇam-amala-vanānte	grass in the pleasant forest
cāru sañcārayan gā:	happily grazing the cows
pavanapurapate	O Lord of Guruvaayur!
tvaṃ dehi	Thou bestow
me deha-saukhyam	unto me good health
Then the spring season approached. In that season the streams were full of pure water, like the pure minds of Thy devotees. O Lord of Guruvaayur! Thou spent such a season enjoying in the forests and happily grazing grass to the cattle in the pleasant forests. O Thou! bestow unto me good health.